	

    FYI, there are four basic technologies currently being used to produce COVID-19 vaccines. They are:

        encapsulated mRNA - these vaccines (e.g. Moderna, Pfizer/BioNTech) contain a modified mRNA molecule that codes for a portion or all of the viral spike protein. The mRNA is protected by encapsulation in lipid nanoparticles, becuase it is chemically unstable. The way it works is the mRNA is translated into viral spike protein in your own cells, complete with the proper glycosylation as natural virus particles, in order to raise an immune response. This is a new technology, but one that appears to have worked better than expected based on early results. The main advantage of mRNA vaccines is that mRNA is relatively easy to automate and manufacture in pure form at large scale, although the current pandemic demand may strain supply chains for specialized reagents for RNA synthesis. mRNA is not likely to persist in your body for any length of time.
        viral vector - these vaccines (e.g. Astra Zeneca, CanSino) use a modified adenovirus to deliver into cells RNA coding for all or part of the viral spike protein, which your cells make, with the proper glycosylation, to generate an immune response. This is a relatively new technology that was originally developed for Ebola and SARS vaccine research. One complication is that, depending on which viral vector is used, one may already have partial immunity to the viral vector, reducing the amount of immunogen that can get into cells to generate the immune response. The result is lower antibody titers than ideal. CanSino is using a human Ad5 adenovirus, which has relatively low (but not zero) exposure in the human population. AstraZeneca is using a modified Ad26 chimpanzee virus for which humans should not have immunity. A potential downside of the viral vector design is that after receiving a viral vector vaccine, future vaccines using the same vector could be less effective due to immunity developed to the viral vector. Manufacturing is technologically complex and challenging at large scale.
        recombinant protein - these vaccines (e.g. Sanofi) rely on the production of the viral spike protein using recombinant DNA technology using mammalian cell culture. The target protein is purified and stabilized (e.g., using lipid nanoparticles) for administration. Sometimes adjuvants are added to the recombinant protein to enhance immune response to the protein. This is proven technology which is used in current commercial vaccines, like the Shingrix shingles vaccine. The manufacturing of purified proteins is fairly technologically complex, and challenging at large scale. Proteins will not be persistent in the body. They will be broken down and recycled relatively quickly.
        inactivated whole virus - this is very old-school, highly proven technology (e.g. SinoVac). Live virus is grown in an appropriate cellular medium, then purified and chemically inactivated. The real, whole virus is used to raise an immune response. This is basically how the flu virus is made today, using chicken eggs as the growth medium. This is also a challenging manufacturing method, especially at large scale.

    Any of these technologies is likely to produce effective vaccines, and all of them together may be necessary to develop enough doses to staunch the pandemic. Of these, I would have some concern about some of the viral vector vaccines not achieving a high level of protection for all individuals. If you happen to have antibodies against the viral vector, your immunization experience may not be ideal. The AstraZeneca vaccine may be a better bet than any of the Ad5-based viral vector vaccines. Personally, I would be hoping to get one with a high level of proven efficacy through phase 3 trials. And it would be desirable to receive one that prevents infection as well as disease, to be kind to your fellow human beings. But any protection is better than none.

    Be careful. Stay safe, and let's work toward a future to pursue our love of aviation in good health. Vaccines can be a step in that direction.
     

